docs/content/mocking.mdx, before:

---
title: Mocking
sidebar_position: 5
---

# Mocking

This Bats helper library provides command mocking functionality for BATS.

It allows to mock commands and check how they were called.

This is a very powerful feature that allows to test complex scenarios as unit
tests.

:::note

To run multiple mock assertions in a more convenient way, check out
the [step runner](step-runner) helper.

:::

## Acknowledgments

This functionality is based on the [bats-mock](https://github.com/grayhemp/bats-mock) project.
A special thank you to the contributors for their original work.

## Usage

```bash
setup() {
  setup_mock
}

# Example to test the notify.sh script that uses curl to send a notification to external system.
@test "Notify" {
  app_id="9876543210"

  # Mock curl command.
  mock_curl="$(mock_command "curl")"

  # Setup mock responses for curl call with specific arguments in notify.sh.
  mock_set_output "${mock_curl}" "12345678910-1234567890-${app_id}-12345" 1
  mock_set_output "${mock_curl}" "201" 2

  run ./notify.sh
  assert_success

  # Single line mock assertion example.
  assert_equal "-s -X GET https://api.example.com/v2/applications.json" "$(mock_get_call_args "${mock_curl}" 1)"
  # Multi-line mock assertion example.
  assert_equal '-X POST https://api.example.com/v2/applications/9876543210/deployments.json -d {
  "deployment": {
    "description": "example description",
  }
}' "$(mock_get_call_args "${mock_curl}" 2)"
}
```

## Setup functions

### `mock_create`

- **Description**: Creates a mock program that can be executed and tracked.
- **Arguments**: None
- **Global Variables**: Uses `BATS_MOCK_TMPDIR` if set, otherwise `BATS_TMPDIR`
- **Outputs**: Path to the created mock file
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock=$(mock_create)
  ```

### `setup_mock`

Setup mock support. Call this function from your test's `setup()` method.

### `mock_command`

- **Description**: Mock provided command.
- **Arguments**:
  - Mocked command name
- **Outputs**: Path to created mock file.
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock_command "ls"
  ```

### `mock_set_output`

- **Description**: Sets the output of the mock.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Output or `-` for STDIN
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock_set_output "${mock}" "some output"
  ```

### `mock_set_status`

- **Description**: Sets the exit status of the mock.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Status
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock_set_status "${mock}" 0
  ```

### `mock_set_side_effect`

- **Description**: Sets shell code to be executed when the mock runs.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Side effect (shell code) or `-` for STDIN
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock_set_side_effect "${mock}" "echo 'side effect executed' > /tmp/log"
  ```

## Assertion functions

### `mock_get_call_args`

- **Description**: Returns the arguments line the mock was called with.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Outputs**: Arguments line
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  assert_equal "expected_arg1 expected_arg2" "$(mock_get_call_args "${mock}" 1)"
  ```

### `mock_get_call_num`

- **Description**: Returns the number of times the mock was called.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
- **Outputs**: Number of calls
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  assert_equal "1" "$(mock_get_call_num "${mock}")"
  ```

### `mock_get_call_user`

- **Description**: Returns the user the mock was called with.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Outputs**: User name
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  assert_equal "expected_user" "$(mock_get_call_user "${mock}" 1)"
  ```

### `mock_get_call_env`

- **Description**: Returns the value of the environment variable the mock was
  called with.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Variable name
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Outputs**: Variable value
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  assert_equal "expected_val1" "$(mock_get_call_env "${mock}" VAR_NAME 1)"
  ```

Commit message:

[#106] Added path_prefix and path_rm for PATH modification

docs/content/mocking.mdx, after:

---
title: Mocking
sidebar_position: 5
---

# Mocking

This Bats helper library provides command mocking functionality for BATS.

It allows to mock commands and check how they were called.

This is a very powerful feature that allows to test complex scenarios as unit
tests.

:::note

To run multiple mock assertions in a more convenient way, check out
the [step runner](step-runner) helper.

:::

## Acknowledgments

This functionality is based on the [bats-mock](https://github.com/grayhemp/bats-mock) project.
A special thank you to the contributors for their original work.

## Usage

```bash
setup() {
  setup_mock
}

# Example to test the notify.sh script that uses curl to send a notification to external system.
@test "Notify" {
  app_id="9876543210"

  # Mock curl command.
  mock_curl="$(mock_command "curl")"

  # Setup mock responses for curl call with specific arguments in notify.sh.
  mock_set_output "${mock_curl}" "12345678910-1234567890-${app_id}-12345" 1
  mock_set_output "${mock_curl}" "201" 2

  run ./notify.sh
  assert_success

  # Single line mock assertion example.
  assert_equal "-s -X GET https://api.example.com/v2/applications.json" "$(mock_get_call_args "${mock_curl}" 1)"
  # Multi-line mock assertion example.
  assert_equal '-X POST https://api.example.com/v2/applications/9876543210/deployments.json -d {
  "deployment": {
    "description": "example description",
  }
}' "$(mock_get_call_args "${mock_curl}" 2)"
}
```

## Setup functions

### `mock_create`

- **Description**: Creates a mock program that can be executed and tracked.
- **Arguments**: None
- **Global Variables**: Uses `BATS_MOCK_TMPDIR` if set, otherwise `BATS_TMPDIR`
- **Outputs**: Path to the created mock file
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock=$(mock_create)
  ```

### `setup_mock`

Setup mock support. Call this function from your test's `setup()` method.

### `mock_command`

- **Description**: Mock provided command.
- **Arguments**:
  - Mocked command name
- **Outputs**: Path to created mock file.
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock_command "ls"
  ```

### `mock_set_output`

- **Description**: Sets the output of the mock.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Output or `-` for STDIN
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock_set_output "${mock}" "some output"
  ```

### `mock_set_status`

- **Description**: Sets the exit status of the mock.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Status
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock_set_status "${mock}" 0
  ```

### `mock_set_side_effect`

- **Description**: Sets shell code to be executed when the mock runs.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Side effect (shell code) or `-` for STDIN
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock_set_side_effect "${mock}" "echo 'side effect executed' > /tmp/log"
  ```

### `path_prefix`

- **Description**: Returns a PATH string with the mock directory prepended. This ensures mocked commands are found first.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to mock/command/directory to prepend
  - PATH to modify (optional) - Defaults to `$PATH` if not provided
- **Outputs**: Modified PATH string
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  mock_wget=$(mock_create wget)
  new_path=$(path_prefix "${mock_wget}")
  PATH="${new_path}" run ./script.sh
  ```

### `path_rm`

- **Description**: Returns a PATH string with a specific directory removed. Useful for testing command unavailability.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path or command to remove
  - PATH to modify (optional) - Defaults to `$PATH` if not provided
- **Outputs**: Modified PATH string
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  # Remove /usr/bin from PATH
  new_path=$(path_rm /usr/bin)

  # Remove directory containing curl
  new_path=$(path_rm "$(command -v curl)")
  ```

## Assertion functions

### `mock_get_call_args`

- **Description**: Returns the arguments line the mock was called with.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Outputs**: Arguments line
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  assert_equal "expected_arg1 expected_arg2" "$(mock_get_call_args "${mock}" 1)"
  ```

### `mock_get_call_num`

- **Description**: Returns the number of times the mock was called.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
- **Outputs**: Number of calls
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  assert_equal "1" "$(mock_get_call_num "${mock}")"
  ```

### `mock_get_call_user`

- **Description**: Returns the user the mock was called with.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Outputs**: User name
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  assert_equal "expected_user" "$(mock_get_call_user "${mock}" 1)"
  ```

### `mock_get_call_env`

- **Description**: Returns the value of the environment variable the mock was
  called with.
- **Arguments**:
  - Path to the mock
  - Variable name
  - Index of the call (optional)
- **Outputs**: Variable value
- **Usage**:
  ```bash
  assert_equal "expected_val1" "$(mock_get_call_env "${mock}" VAR_NAME 1)"
  ```
